Here is a little example of boolean expressions (you don\'t have to type
it in):

``` {.python}
a = 6
b = 7
c = 42
print(1, a == 6)
print(2, a == 7)
print(3, a == 6 and b == 7)
print(4, a == 7 and b == 7)
print(5, not a == 7 and b == 7)
print(6, a == 7 or b == 7)
print(7, a == 7 or b == 6)
print(8, not (a == 7 and b == 6))
print(9, not a == 7 and b == 6)
```

With the output being:

`1 True`\
`2 False`\
`3 True`\
`4 False`\
`5 True`\
`6 True`\
`7 False`\
`8 True`\
`9 False`

What is going on? The program consists of a bunch of funny looking
`print` statements. Each `print` statement prints a number and an
expression. The number is to help keep track of which statement I am
dealing with. Notice how each expression ends up being either `False` or
`True`. In Python false can also be written as 0 and true as 1.

The lines:

``` {.python}
print(1, a == 6)
print(2, a == 7)
```

print out a `True` and a `False` respectively just as expected since the
first is true and the second is false. The third print,
`print(3, a == 6 and b == 7)`, is a little different. The operator `and`
means if both the statement before and the statement after are true then
the whole expression is true otherwise the whole expression is false.
The next line, `print(4, a == 7 and b == 7)`, shows how if part of an
`and` expression is false, the whole thing is false. The behavior of
`and` can be summarized as follows:

  expression          result
  ------------------- --------
  true `and` true     true
  true `and` false    false
  false `and` true    false
  false `and` false   false

Notice that if the first expression is false Python does not check the
second expression since it knows the whole expression is false. Try
running `False and print("Hi")` and compare this to running
`True and print("Hi")` The technical term for this is [short-circuit
evaluation](w:Short-circuit_evaluation "wikilink")

The next line, `print(5, not a == 7 and b == 7)`, uses the `not`
operator. `not` just gives the opposite of the expression. (The
expression could be rewritten as `print(5, a != 7 and b == 7)`). Here is
the table:

  expression    result
  ------------- --------
  `not` true    false
  `not` false   true

The two following lines, `print(6, a == 7 or b == 7)` and
`print(7, a == 7 or b == 6)`, use the `or` operator. The `or` operator
returns true if the first expression is true, or if the second
expression is true or both are true. If neither are true it returns
false. Here\'s the table:

  expression         result
  ------------------ --------
  true `or` true     true
  true `or` false    true
  false `or` true    true
  false `or` false   false

Notice that if the first expression is true Python doesn\'t check the
second expression since it knows the whole expression is true. This
works since `or` is true if at least one half of the expression is true.
The first part is true so the second part could be either false or true,
but the whole expression is still true.

The next two lines, `print(8, not (a == 7 and b == 6))` and
`print(9, not a == 7 and b == 6)`, show that parentheses can be used to
group expressions and force one part to be evaluated first. Notice that
the parentheses changed the expression from false to true. This occurred
since the parentheses forced the `not` to apply to the whole expression
instead of just the `a == 7` portion.

Here is an example of using a boolean expression:

``` {.python}
list = ["Life", "The Universe", "Everything", "Jack", "Jill", "Life", "Jill"]

# make a copy of the list. See the More on Lists chapter to explain what [:] means.
copy = list[:]
# sort the copy
copy.sort()
prev = copy[0]
del copy[0]

count = 0

# go through the list searching for a match
while count < len(copy) and copy[count] != prev:
    prev = copy[count]
    count = count + 1

# If a match was not found then count can't be < len
# since the while loop continues while count is < len
# and no match is found

if count < len(copy):
    print("First Match:", prev)
```

And here is the output:

`First Match: Jill`

This program works by continuing to check for match
`while count < len(copy) and copy[count] is not equal to prev`. When
either `count` is greater than the last index of `copy` or a match has
been found the `and` is no longer true so the loop exits. The `if`
simply checks to make sure that the `while` exited because a match was
found.

The other \"trick\" of `and` is used in this example. If you look at the
table for `and` notice that the third entry is \"false and false\". If
`count >= len(copy)` (in other words `count < len(copy)` is false) then
`copy[count]` is never looked at. This is because Python knows that if
the first is false then they can\'t both be true. This is known as a
short circuit and is useful if the second half of the `and` will cause
an error if something is wrong. I used the first expression
(`count < len(copy)`) to check and see if `count` was a valid index for
`copy`. (If you don\'t believe me remove the matches \"Jill\" and
\"Life\", check that it still works and then reverse the order of
`count < len(copy) and copy[count] != prev` to
`copy[count] != prev and count < len(copy)`.)

Boolean expressions can be used when you need to check two or more
different things at once.

