### Creating your own module

When python reads the import command, it first checks files in your
directory, then site-packages or pre installed modules. To make your own
module, just create a .py file in the current directory and use the
command:

``` {.python3}
import module
```

This will try to import the file module.py from your current directory
and if not found, from site-packages and prepackaged modules. Changing
module to the name of the .py file you created will import that file.

However, when it imports the module, it will basically start the file as
a program, so any code on there will be run. You want to group all code
into functions. ====The \_\_name\_\_ == \_\_main\_\_ trick==== In
python, the variable `__name__` will give you the current name of the
program. If a module you import prints the `__name__` variable, then it
will print the name of the module. If the current file prints the
`__name__` variable, it will print `__main__`, to show it is the main
program.

If an if statement checks the name variable and runs code if the program
is main, it can bypass the unintentional run problem created when a
module is imported. Say for example you have a file, which runs some
code. It also has a function you want to use in another program.
However, you only want the function, not to run the code. By setting up
the code below, it will only run the code if it is the file that was
clicked on or started, not if it was imported.

``` {.python3}
if __name__ == '__main__':
    pass
```

In this instance, if the file is run but not imported, it will run the
pass command. You can replace the pass command with the code you want to
be run when not imported. Just remember to indent the code.

