And now presenting a cool trick that can be done with strings:

``` {.python}
def shout(string):
    for character in string:
        print("Gimme a " + character)
        print("'" + character + "'")

shout("Lose")

def middle(string):
    print("The middle character is:", string[len(string) // 2])

middle("abcdefg")
middle("The Python Programming Language")
middle("Atlanta")
```

And the output is:

`Gimme a L`\
`'L'`\
`Gimme a o`\
`'o'`\
`Gimme a s`\
`'s'`\
`Gimme a e`\
`'e'`\
`The middle character is: d`\
`The middle character is: r`\
`The middle character is: a`

What these programs demonstrate is that strings are similar to lists in
several ways. The `shout()` function shows that `for` loops can be used
with strings just as they can be used with lists. The `middle` procedure
shows that that strings can also use the `len()` function and array
indexes and slices. Most list features work on strings as well.

The next feature demonstrates some string specific features:

``` {.python}
def to_upper(string):
    ## Converts a string to upper case
    upper_case = ""
    for character in string:
        if 'a' <= character <= 'z':
            location = ord(character) - ord('a')
            new_ascii = location + ord('A')
            character = chr(new_ascii)
        upper_case = upper_case + character
    return upper_case

print(to_upper("This is Text"))
```

with the output being:

`THIS IS TEXT`

This works because the computer represents the characters of a string as
numbers from 0 to 1,114,111. For example \'A\' is 65, \'B\' is 66 and א
is 1488. The values are the [unicode](w:en:unicode "wikilink") value.
Python has a function called `ord()` (short for ordinal) that returns a
character as a number. There is also a corresponding function called
`chr()` that converts a number into a character. With this in mind the
program should start to be clear. The first detail is the line:
`if 'a' <= character <= 'z':` which checks to see if a letter is lower
case. If it is then the next lines are used. First it is converted into
a location so that a = 0, b = 1, c = 2 and so on with the line:
`location = ord(character) - ord('a')`. Next the new value is found with
`new_ascii = location + ord('A')`. This value is converted back to a
character that is now upper case. Note that if you really need the upper
case of a letter, you should use `u=var.upper()` which will work with
other languages as well.

Now for some interactive typing exercise:

`>>> `**`#`` ``Integer`` ``to`` ``String`**\
`>>> `**`2`**\
`2`\
`>>> `**`repr(2)`**\
`'2'`\
`>>> `**`-123`**\
`-123`\
`>>> `**`repr(-123)`**\
`'-123'`\
`>>> `**`#`` ``String`` ``to`` ``Integer`**\
`>>> `**`"23"`**\
`'23'`\
`>>> `**`int("23")`**\
`23`\
`>>> `**`"23"`` ``*`` ``2`**\
`'2323'`\
`>>> `**`int("23")`` ``*`` ``2`**\
`46`\
`>>> `**`#`` ``Float`` ``to`` ``String`**\
`>>> `**`1.23`**\
`1.23`\
`>>> `**`repr(1.23)`**\
`'1.23'`\
`>>> `**`#`` ``Float`` ``to`` ``Integer`**\
`>>> `**`1.23`**\
`1.23`\
`>>> `**`int(1.23)`**\
`1`\
`>>> `**`int(-1.23)`**\
`-1`\
`>>> `**`#`` ``String`` ``to`` ``Float`**\
`>>> `**`float("1.23")`**\
`1.23`\
`>>> `**`"1.23"`**` `\
`'1.23'`\
`>>> `**`float("123")`**\
`123.0`

If you haven\'t guessed already the function `repr()` can convert an
integer to a string and the function `int()` can convert a string to an
integer. The function `float()` can convert a string to a float. The
`repr()` function returns a printable representation of something. Here
are some examples of this:

`>>> `**`repr(1)`**\
`'1'`\
`>>> `**`repr(234.14)`**\
`'234.14'`\
`>>> `**`repr([4,`` ``42,`` ``10])`**\
`'[4, 42, 10]'`

The `int()` function tries to convert a string (or a float) into an
integer. There is also a similar function called `float()` that will
convert an integer or a string into a float. Another function that
Python has is the `eval()` function. The `eval()` function takes a
string and returns data of the type that python thinks it found. For
example:

`>>> `**`v`` ``=`` ``eval('123')`**\
`>>> `**`print(v,`` ``type(v))`**\
`123 <type 'int'>`\
`>>> `**`v`` ``=`` ``eval('645.123')`**\
`>>> `**`print(v,`` ``type(v))`**\
`645.123 <type 'float'>`\
`>>> `**`v`` ``=`` ``eval('[1,`` ``2,`` ``3]')`**\
`>>> `**`print(v,`` ``type(v))`**\
`[1, 2, 3] <type 'list'>`

If you use the `eval()` function you should check that it returns the
type that you expect.

One useful string function is the `split()` method. Here\'s an example:

`>>> `**`"This`` ``is`` ``a`` ``bunch`` ``of`` ``words".split()`**\
`['This', 'is', 'a', 'bunch', 'of', 'words']`\
`>>> `**`text`` ``=`` ``"First`` ``batch,`` ``second`` ``batch,`` ``third,`` ``fourth"`**\
`>>> `**`text.split(",")`**\
`['First batch', ' second batch', ' third', ' fourth']`

Notice how `split()` converts a string into a list of strings. The
string is split by whitespace by default or by the optional argument (in
this case a comma). You can also add another argument that tells
`split()` how many times the separator will be used to split the text.
For example:

`>>> `**`list`` ``=`` ``text.split(",")`**\
`>>> `**`len(list)`**\
`4`\
`>>> `**`list[-1]`**\
`' fourth'`\
`>>> `**`list`` ``=`` ``text.split(",",`` ``2)`**\
`>>> `**`len(list)`**\
`3`\
`>>> `**`list[-1]`**\
`' third, fourth'`

### Slicing strings (and lists)

Strings can be cut into pieces --- in the same way as it was shown for
lists in the previous chapter --- by using the *slicing* \"operator\"
`[]`. The slicing operator works in the same way as before:
text\[first\_index:last\_index\] (in very rare cases there can be
another colon and a third argument, as in the example shown below).

In order not to get confused by the index numbers, it is easiest to see
them as *clipping places*, possibilities to cut a string into parts.
Here is an example, which shows the clipping places (in yellow) and
their index numbers (red and blue) for a simple text string:

<tt>

  -------- ---- ----- --- --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---- --- ---- --- ----- ----
                0         1       2       \...       -2       -1             
                ↓         ↓       ↓       ↓          ↓        ↓        ↓     
  text =   \"         S       T       R          I        N        G         \"
                ↑                                                      ↑     
                \[:                                                    :\]   
  -------- ---- ----- --- --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---- --- ---- --- ----- ----

</tt>

Note that the red indexes are counted from the beginning of the string
and the blue ones from the end of the string backwards. (Note that there
is no blue -0, which could seem to be logical at the end of the string.
Because `-0 == 0`, -0 means \"beginning of the string\" as well.) Now we
are ready to use the indexes for slicing operations:

<tt>

  -------------- --- ------------
  text\[1:4\]    →   \"TRI\"
  text\[:5\]     →   \"STRIN\"
  text\[:-1\]    →   \"STRIN\"
  text\[-4:\]    →   \"RING\"
  text\[2\]      →   \"R\"
  text\[:\]      →   \"STRING\"
  text\[::-1\]   →   \"GNIRTS\"
  -------------- --- ------------

</tt>

`text[1:4]` gives us all of the `text` string between clipping places 1
and 4, \"`TRI`\". If you omit one of the \[first\_index:last\_index\]
arguments, you get the beginning or end of the string as default:
`text[:5]` gives \"`STRIN`\". For both `first_index` and `last_index` we
can use both the red and the blue numbering schema: `text[:-1]` gives
the same as `text[:5]`, because the index -1 is at the same place as 5
in this case. If we do not use an argument containing a colon, the
number is treated in a different way: `text[2]` gives us one character
following the second clipping point, \"`R`\". The special slicing
operation `text[:]` means \"from the beginning to the end\" and produces
a copy of the entire string (or list, as shown in the previous chapter).

Last but not least, the slicing operation can have a second colon and a
third argument, which is interpreted as the \"step size\": `text[::-1]`
is `text` from beginning to the end, with a step size of -1. -1 means
\"every character, but in the other direction\". \"`STRING`\" backwards
is \"`GNIRTS`\" (test a step length of 2, if you have not got the point
here).

All these slicing operations work with lists as well. In that sense
strings are just a special case of lists, where the list elements are
single characters. Just remember the concept of *clipping places*, and
the indexes for slicing things will get a lot less confusing.

### Examples

``` {.python}
# This program requires an excellent understanding of decimal numbers.
def to_string(in_int):
    """Converts an integer to a string"""
    out_str = ""
    prefix = ""
    if in_int < 0:
        prefix = "-"
        in_int = -in_int
    while in_int // 10 != 0:
        out_str = str(in_int % 10) + out_str
        in_int = in_int // 10
    out_str = str(in_int % 10) + out_str
    return prefix + out_str

def to_int(in_str):
    """Converts a string to an integer"""
    out_num = 0
    if in_str[0] == "-":
        multiplier = -1
        in_str = in_str[1:]
    else:
        multiplier = 1
    for c in in_str:
        out_num = out_num * 10 + int(c)
    return out_num * multiplier

print(to_string(2))
print(to_string(23445))
print(to_string(-23445))
print(to_int("14234"))
print(to_int("12345"))
print(to_int("-3512"))
```

The output is:

`2`\
`23445`\
`-23445`\
`14234`\
`12345`\
`-3512`
