### Slicing strings (and lists)

Strings can be cut into pieces --- in the same way as it was shown for
lists in the previous chapter --- by using the *slicing* \"operator\"
`[]`. The slicing operator works in the same way as before:
text\[first\_index:last\_index\] (in very rare cases there can be
another colon and a third argument, as in the example shown below).

In order not to get confused by the index numbers, it is easiest to see
them as *clipping places*, possibilities to cut a string into parts.
Here is an example, which shows the clipping places (in yellow) and
their index numbers (red and blue) for a simple text string:

<tt>

  -------- ---- ----- --- --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---- --- ---- --- ----- ----
                0         1       2       \...       -2       -1             
                ↓         ↓       ↓       ↓          ↓        ↓        ↓     
  text =   \"         S       T       R          I        N        G         \"
                ↑                                                      ↑     
                \[:                                                    :\]   
  -------- ---- ----- --- --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---- --- ---- --- ----- ----

</tt>

Note that the red indexes are counted from the beginning of the string
and the blue ones from the end of the string backwards. (Note that there
is no blue -0, which could seem to be logical at the end of the string.
Because `-0 == 0`, -0 means \"beginning of the string\" as well.) Now we
are ready to use the indexes for slicing operations:

<tt>

  -------------- --- ------------
  text\[1:4\]    →   \"TRI\"
  text\[:5\]     →   \"STRIN\"
  text\[:-1\]    →   \"STRIN\"
  text\[-4:\]    →   \"RING\"
  text\[2\]      →   \"R\"
  text\[:\]      →   \"STRING\"
  text\[::-1\]   →   \"GNIRTS\"
  -------------- --- ------------

</tt>

`text[1:4]` gives us all of the `text` string between clipping places 1
and 4, \"`TRI`\". If you omit one of the \[first\_index:last\_index\]
arguments, you get the beginning or end of the string as default:
`text[:5]` gives \"`STRIN`\". For both `first_index` and `last_index` we
can use both the red and the blue numbering schema: `text[:-1]` gives
the same as `text[:5]`, because the index -1 is at the same place as 5
in this case. If we do not use an argument containing a colon, the
number is treated in a different way: `text[2]` gives us one character
following the second clipping point, \"`R`\". The special slicing
operation `text[:]` means \"from the beginning to the end\" and produces
a copy of the entire string (or list, as shown in the previous chapter).

Last but not least, the slicing operation can have a second colon and a
third argument, which is interpreted as the \"step size\": `text[::-1]`
is `text` from beginning to the end, with a step size of -1. -1 means
\"every character, but in the other direction\". \"`STRING`\" backwards
is \"`GNIRTS`\" (test a step length of 2, if you have not got the point
here).

All these slicing operations work with lists as well. In that sense
strings are just a special case of lists, where the list elements are
single characters. Just remember the concept of *clipping places*, and
the indexes for slicing things will get a lot less confusing.

