### File I/O

Here is a simple example of file I/O (input/output):

``` {.python}
# Write a file
with open("test.txt", "wt") as out_file:
    out_file.write("This Text is going to out file\nLook at it and see!")

# Read a file
with open("test.txt", "rt") as in_file:
    text = in_file.read()

print(text)
```

The output and the contents of the file `test.txt` are:

`This Text is going to out file`\
`Look at it and see!`

Notice that it wrote a file called `test.txt` in the directory that you
ran the program from. The `\n` in the string tells Python to put a
*n*ewline where it is.

An overview of file I/O is:

-   Get a file object with the `open` function
-   Read or write to the file object (depending on how it was opened)
-   If you did not use `with` to open the file, you\'d have to close it
    manually

The first step is to get a file object. The way to do this is to use the
`open` function. The format is `file_object = open(filename, mode)`
where `file_object` is the variable to put the file object, `filename`
is a string with the filename, and `mode` is `"rt"` to *r*ead a file as
*t*ext or `"wt"` to *w*rite a file as *t*ext (and a few others we will
skip here). Next the file objects functions can be called. The two most
common functions are `read` and `write`. The `write` function adds a
string to the end of the file. The `read` function reads the next thing
in the file and returns it as a string. If no argument is given it will
return the whole file (as done in the example).

Now here is a new version of the phone numbers program that we made
earlier:

``` {.python}
def print_numbers(numbers):
    print("Telephone Numbers:")
    for k, v in numbers.items():
        print("Name:", k, "\tNumber:", v)
    print()

def add_number(numbers, name, number):
    numbers[name] = number

def lookup_number(numbers, name):
    if name in numbers:
        return "The number is " + numbers[name]
    else:
        return name + " was not found"

def remove_number(numbers, name):
    if name in numbers:
        del numbers[name]
    else:
        print(name," was not found")

def load_numbers(numbers, filename):
    in_file = open(filename, "rt")
    while True:
        in_line = in_file.readline()
        if not in_line:
            break
        in_line = in_line[:-1]
        name, number = in_line.split(",")
        numbers[name] = number
    in_file.close()

def save_numbers(numbers, filename):
    out_file = open(filename, "wt")
    for k, v in numbers.items():
        out_file.write(k + "," + v + "\n")
    out_file.close()

def print_menu():
    print('1. Print Phone Numbers')
    print('2. Add a Phone Number')
    print('3. Remove a Phone Number')
    print('4. Lookup a Phone Number')
    print('5. Load numbers')
    print('6. Save numbers')
    print('7. Quit')
    print()

phone_list = {}
menu_choice = 0
print_menu()
while True:
    menu_choice = int(input("Type in a number (1-7): "))
    if menu_choice == 1:
        print_numbers(phone_list)
    elif menu_choice == 2:
        print("Add Name and Number")
        name = input("Name: ")
        phone = input("Number: ")
        add_number(phone_list, name, phone)
    elif menu_choice == 3:
        print("Remove Name and Number")
        name = input("Name: ")
        remove_number(phone_list, name)
    elif menu_choice == 4:
        print("Lookup Number")
        name = input("Name: ")
        print(lookup_number(phone_list, name))
    elif menu_choice == 5:
        filename = input("Filename to load: ")
        load_numbers(phone_list, filename)
    elif menu_choice == 6:
        filename = input("Filename to save: ")
        save_numbers(phone_list, filename)
    elif menu_choice == 7:
        break
    else:
        print_menu()

print("Goodbye")  
```

Notice that it now includes saving and loading files. Here is some
output of my running it twice:

`1. Print Phone Numbers`\
`2. Add a Phone Number`\
`3. Remove a Phone Number`\
`4. Lookup a Phone Number`\
`5. Load numbers`\
`6. Save numbers`\
`7. Quit`\
\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`2`**\
`Add Name and Number`\
`Name: `**`Jill`**\
`Number: `**`1234`**\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`2`**\
`Add Name and Number`\
`Name: `**`Fred`**\
`Number: `**`4321`**\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`1`**\
`Telephone Numbers:`\
`Name: Jill     Number: 1234`\
`Name: Fred     Number: 4321`\
\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`6`**\
`Filename to save: `**`numbers.txt`**\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`7`**\
`Goodbye`

`1. Print Phone Numbers`\
`2. Add a Phone Number`\
`3. Remove a Phone Number`\
`4. Lookup a Phone Number`\
`5. Load numbers`\
`6. Save numbers`\
`7. Quit`\
\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`5`**\
`Filename to load: `**`numbers.txt`**\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`1`**\
`Telephone Numbers:`\
`Name: Jill     Number: 1234`\
`Name: Fred     Number: 4321`\
\
`Type in a number (1-7): `**`7`**\
`Goodbye`

The new portions of this program are:

``` {.python}
def load_numbers(numbers, filename):
    in_file = open(filename, "rt")
    while True:
        in_line = in_file.readline()
        if not in_line:
            break
        in_line = in_line[:-1]
        name, number = in_line.split(",")
        numbers[name] = number
    in_file.close()

def save_numbers(numbers, filename):
    out_file = open(filename, "wt")
    for k, v in numbers.items():
        out_file.write(k + "," + v + "\n")
    out_file.close()
```

First we will look at the save portion of the program. First it creates
a file object with the command `open(filename, "wt")`. Next it goes
through and creates a line for each of the phone numbers with the
command `out_file.write(k + "," + v + "\n")`. This writes out a line
that contains the name, a comma, the number and follows it by a newline.

The loading portion is a little more complicated. It starts by getting a
file object. Then it uses a `while True:` loop to keep looping until a
`break` statement is encountered. Next it gets a line with the line
`in_line = in_file.readline()`. The `readline` function will return an
empty string when the end of the file is reached. The `if` statement
checks for this and `break`s out of the `while` loop when that happens.
Of course if the `readline` function did not return the newline at the
end of the line there would be no way to tell if an empty string was an
empty line or the end of the file so the newline is left in what
`readline` returns. Hence we have to get rid of the newline. The line
`in_line = in_line[:-1]` does this for us by dropping the last
character. Next the line `name, number = in_line.split(",")` splits the
line at the comma into a name and a number. This is then added to the
`numbers` dictionary.

