### \...or how to handle errors

### closing files with with

We use the \"with\" statement to open and close files.[^1][^2]

``` {.python}
with open("in_test.txt", "rt") as in_file:
    with open("out_test.txt", "wt") as out_file:
        text = in_file.read()
        data = parse(text)
        results = encode(data)
        out_file.write(results)
    print( "All done." )
```

If some sort of error happens anywhere in this code (one of the files is
inaccessible, the parse() function chokes on corrupt data, etc.) the
\"with\" statements guarantee that all the files will eventually be
properly closed. Closing a file just means that the file is \"cleaned
up\" and \"released\" by our program so that it can be used in another
program.

### catching errors with try

So you now have the perfect program, it runs flawlessly, except for one
detail, it will crash on invalid user input. Have no fear, for Python
has a special control structure for you. It\'s called `try` and it tries
to do something. Here is an example of a program with a problem:

``` {.python}
print("Type Control C or -1 to exit")
number = 1
while number != -1:
   number = int(input("Enter a number: "))
   print("You entered:", number)
```

Notice how when you enter `@#&` it outputs something like:

`Traceback (most recent call last):`\
` File "try_less.py", line 4, in `<module>\
`   number = int(input("Enter a number: "))`\
`ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '\\@#&'`

As you can see the `int()` function is unhappy with the number `@#&` (as
well it should be). The last line shows what the problem is; Python
found a `ValueError`. How can our program deal with this? What we do is
first: put the place where errors may occur in a `try` block, and
second: tell Python how we want `ValueError`s handled. The following
program does this:

``` {.python}
print("Type Control C or -1 to exit")
number = 1
while number != -1:
    try:
        number = int(input("Enter a number: "))
        print("You entered:", number)
    except ValueError:
        print("That was not a number.")
```

Now when we run the new program and give it `@#&` it tells us \"That was
not a number.\" and continues with what it was doing before.

When your program keeps having some error that you know how to handle,
put code in a `try` block, and put the way to handle the error in the
`except` block.

### Exercises

Update at least the phone numbers program (in section
[Dictionaries](../Dictionaries "wikilink")) so it doesn\'t crash if a
user doesn\'t enter any data at the menu.

[^1]: [\"The \'with\'
    statement\"](http://docs.python.org/3.4/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-with-statement)

[^2]: [\'The Python \"with\" Statement by
    Example\'](http://preshing.com/20110920/the-python-with-statement-by-example/)
