### 输出

程序语言教程有这样一个传统，那就是第一个例子总是
一个输出 Hello World 的小程序，像下面这样


``` {.python}
print("Hello, World!")
```

你可以直接点击“运行程序“按钮在浏览器里直接运行这段代码。

你也可以在命令行中运行这段程序：首先打开任何一个文本编辑软件，
输入上面这段程序，将这个文件保存为 `hello.py`，之后在终端
输入 `python3 hello.py`。

这个程序在运行之后会在屏幕上打印出如下一行

`Hello, World!`

Now I\'m not going to tell you this every time, but when I show you a
program I recommend that you type it in and run it. I learn better when
I type it in and you probably do too.

Now here is a more complicated program:

``` {.python}
print("Jack and Jill went up a hill")
print("to fetch a pail of water;")
print("Jack fell down, and broke his crown,")
print("and Jill came tumbling after.")
```

When you run this program it prints out:

`Jack and Jill went up a hill`\
`to fetch a pail of water;`\
`Jack fell down, and broke his crown,`\
`and Jill came tumbling after.`

When the computer runs this program it first sees the line:

``` {.python}
print("Jack and Jill went up a hill")
```

so the computer prints:

`Jack and Jill went up a hill`

Then the computer goes down to the next line and sees:

``` {.python}
print("to fetch a pail of water;")
```

So the computer prints to the screen:

`to fetch a pail of water;`

The computer keeps looking at each line, follows the command and then
goes on to the next line. The computer keeps running commands until it
reaches the end of the program.

#### Terminology

Now is probably a good time to give you a bit of an explanation of what
is happening - and a little bit of programming terminology.

What we were doing above was using a *function* called `print`. The
function\'s name - `print` - is followed by parentheses containing zero
or more *arguments*. So in this example

``` {.python}
print("Hello, World!")
```

there is one *argument*, which is `"Hello, World!"`. Note that this
argument is a group of characters enclosed in double quotes (\"\"). This
is commonly referred to as a *string of characters*, or *string*, for
short. Another example of a string is `"Jack and Jill went up a hill"`.
The combination of a function and parentheses with the arguments is a
*function call*.

A function and its arguments are one type of *statement* that python
has, so

``` {.python}
print("Hello, World!")
```

is an example of a statement. Basically, you can think of a statement as
a single line in a program.

That\'s probably more than enough terminology for now.

