### Input and Variables

Now I feel it is time for a really complicated program. Here it is:

``` {.python}
print("Halt!")
user_input = input("Who goes there? ")
print("You may pass,",  user_input)
```

When **I** ran it, here is what **my** screen showed:

`Halt!`\
`Who goes there? `**`Josh`**\
`You may pass, Josh`

*Note: After running the code by pressing F5, the python shell will only
give output:*

`Halt!`\
`Who goes there?`

*You need to enter your name in the python shell, and then press enter
for the rest of the output.*

Of course when you run the program your screen will look different
because of the `input()` statement. When you ran the program you
probably noticed (you did run the program, right?) how you had to type
in your name and then press Enter. Then the program printed out some
more text and also your name. This is an example of *input*. The program
reaches a certain point and then waits for the user to input some data
that the program can use later.

Of course, getting information from the user would be useless if we
didn\'t have anywhere to put that information and this is where
variables come in. In the previous program `user_input` is a *variable*.
Variables are like a box that can store some piece of data. Here is a
program to show examples of variables:

``` {.python}
a = 123.4
b23 = 'Spam'
first_name = "Bill"
b = 432
c = a + b
print("a + b is",c)
print("first_name is",first_name)
print("Sorted Parts, After Midnight or",b23)
```

And here is the output:

`a + b is 555.4`\
`first_name is Bill`\
`Sorted Parts, After Midnight or Spam`

Variables store data. The variables in the above program are `a`, `b23`,
`first_name`, `b`, and `c`. The two basic types are *strings* and
*numbers*. Strings are a sequence of letters, numbers and other
characters. In this example `b23` and `first_name` are variables that
are storing strings. `Spam`, `Bill`, `a + b is`, `first_name is`, and
`Sorted Parts, After Midnight or` are the strings in this program. The
characters are surrounded by `"` or `'`. The other type of variables are
numbers. Remember that variables are used to store a value, they do not
use quotation marks (\" and \'). If you want to use an actual *value*,
you *must* use quotation marks.

``` {.python}
value1 == Pim
value2 == "Pim"
```

Both look the same, but in the first one Python checks if the value
stored in the variable `value1` is the same as the value stored in the
*variable* `Pim`. In the second one, Python checks if the string (the
actual letters `P`,`i`, and `m`) are the same as in `value2` (continue
this tutorial for more explanation about strings and about the `==`).

### Assignment

Okay, so we have these boxes called variables and also data that can go
into the variable. The computer will see a line like
`first_name = "Bill"` and it reads it as \"Put the string `Bill` into
the box (or variable) `first_name`\". Later on it sees the statement
`c = a + b` and it reads it as \"put the sum of `a + b` or `123.4 + 432`
which equals `555.4` into `c`\". The right hand side of the statement
(`a + b`) is *evaluated* and the result is stored in the variable on the
left hand side (`c`). This is called *assignment*, and you should not
confuse the assignment equal sign (`=`) with \"equality\" in a
mathematical sense here (that\'s what `==` will be used for later).

Here is another example of variable usage:

``` {.python}
a = 1
print(a)
a = a + 1
print(a)
a = a * 2
print(a)
```

And of course here is the output:

`1`\
`2`\
`4`

Even if the same variable appears on both sides of the equals sign
(e.g., spam = spam), the computer still reads it as, \"First find out
the data to store and then find out where the data goes.\"

One more program before I end this chapter:

``` {.python}
number = float(input("Type in a number: "))
integer = int(input("Type in an integer: "))
text = input("Type in a string: ")
print("number =", number)
print("number is a", type(number))
print("number * 2 =", number * 2)
print("integer =", integer)
print("integer is a", type(integer))
print("integer * 2 =", integer * 2)
print("text =", text)
print("text is a", type(text))
print("text * 2 =", text * 2)
```

The output I got was:

`Type in a number: `**`12.34`**\
`Type in an integer: `**`-3`**\
`Type in a string: `**`Hello`**\
`number = 12.34`\
`number is a <class 'float'>`\
`number * 2 = 24.68`\
`integer = -3`\
`integer is a <class 'int'>`\
`integer * 2 = -6`\
`text = Hello`\
`text is a <class 'str'>`\
`text * 2 = HelloHello`

Notice that `number` was created with `float(input())` ,`int(input())`
returns an integer, a number with no decimal point, while `text` created
with `input()` returns a string(can be writen as `str(input())`, too).
When you want the user to type in a decimal use `float(input())`, if you
want the user to type in an integer use `int(input())`, but if you want
the user to type in a string use `input()`.

The second half of the program uses the `type()` function which tells
what kind a variable is. Numbers are of type `int` or `float`, which are
short for *integer* and *floating point* (mostly used for decimal
numbers), respectively. Text strings are of type `str`, short for
*string*. Integers and floats can be worked on by mathematical
functions, strings cannot. Notice how when python multiplies a number by
an integer the expected thing happens. However when a string is
multiplied by an integer the result is that multiple copies of the
string are produced (i.e., `text * 2 = HelloHello`).

Operations with strings do different things than operations with
numbers. As well, some operations only work with numbers (both integers
and floating point numbers) and will give an error if a string is used.
Here are some interactive mode examples to show that some more.

    >>> print("This" + " " + "is" + " joined.")
    This is joined.
    >>> print("Ha, " * 5)
    Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha, 
    >>> print("Ha, " * 5 + "ha!")
    Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha, ha!
    >>> print(3 - 1)
    2
    >>> print("3" - "1")
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for -: 'str' and 'str'
    >>> 

Here is the list of some string operations:

  Operation       Symbol   Example
  --------------- -------- -------------------------------------------
  Repetition      `*`      `"i" * 5 == "iiiii"`
  Concatenation   `+`      `"Hello, " + "World!" == "Hello, World!"`

### Examples

**Rate\_times.py**

``` {.python}
# This program calculates rate and distance problems
print("Input a rate and a distance")
rate = float(input("Rate: "))
distance = float(input("Distance: "))
time=(distance/ rate)
print("Time:", time)
```

Sample runs:

`Input a rate and a distance`\
`Rate: `**`5`**\
`Distance: `**`10`**\
`Time: 2.0`

`Input a rate and a distance`\
`Rate: `**`3.52`**\
`Distance: `**`45.6`**\
`Time: 12.9545454545`

**Area.py**

``` {.python}
# This program calculates the perimeter and area of a rectangle
print("Calculate information about a rectangle")
length = float(input("Length: "))
width = float(input("Width: "))
Perimeter=(2 * length + 2 * width) 
print("Area:", length * width)
print("Perimeter:",Perimeter)
```

Sample runs:

`Calculate information about a rectangle`\
`Length: `**`4`**\
`Width: `**`3`**\
`Area: 12.0`\
`Perimeter: 14.0`

`Calculate information about a rectangle`\
`Length: `**`2.53`**\
`Width: `**`5.2`**\
`Area: 13.156`\
`Perimeter: 15.46`

**Temperature.py**

``` {.python}
# This program converts Fahrenheit to Celsius
fahr_temp = float(input("Fahrenheit temperature: "))
celc_temp = (fahr_temp - 32.0) *( 5.0 / 9.0)
print("Celsius temperature:", celc_temp)
```

Sample runs:

`Fahrenheit temperature: `**`32`**\
`Celsius temperature: 0.0`

`Fahrenheit temperature: `**`-40`**\
`Celsius temperature: -40.0`

`Fahrenheit temperature: `**`212`**\
`Celsius temperature: 100.0`

`Fahrenheit temperature: `**`98.6`**\
`Celsius temperature: 37.0`

### Exercises

Write a program that gets 2 string variables and 2 number variables from
the user, concatenates (joins them together with no spaces) and displays
the strings, then multiplies the two numbers on a new line.

[ca:Python 3 per a no programadors/Qui hi
ha?](ca:Python_3_per_a_no_programadors/Qui_hi_ha? "wikilink")
