### Input and Variables

Now I feel it is time for a really complicated program. Here it is:

``` {.python}
print("Halt!")
user_input = input("Who goes there? ")
print("You may pass,",  user_input)
```

When **I** ran it, here is what **my** screen showed:

`Halt!`\
`Who goes there? `**`Josh`**\
`You may pass, Josh`

*Note: After running the code by pressing F5, the python shell will only
give output:*

`Halt!`\
`Who goes there?`

*You need to enter your name in the python shell, and then press enter
for the rest of the output.*

Of course when you run the program your screen will look different
because of the `input()` statement. When you ran the program you
probably noticed (you did run the program, right?) how you had to type
in your name and then press Enter. Then the program printed out some
more text and also your name. This is an example of *input*. The program
reaches a certain point and then waits for the user to input some data
that the program can use later.

Of course, getting information from the user would be useless if we
didn\'t have anywhere to put that information and this is where
variables come in. In the previous program `user_input` is a *variable*.
Variables are like a box that can store some piece of data. Here is a
program to show examples of variables:

``` {.python}
a = 123.4
b23 = 'Spam'
first_name = "Bill"
b = 432
c = a + b
print("a + b is",c)
print("first_name is",first_name)
print("Sorted Parts, After Midnight or",b23)
```

And here is the output:

`a + b is 555.4`\
`first_name is Bill`\
`Sorted Parts, After Midnight or Spam`

Variables store data. The variables in the above program are `a`, `b23`,
`first_name`, `b`, and `c`. The two basic types are *strings* and
*numbers*. Strings are a sequence of letters, numbers and other
characters. In this example `b23` and `first_name` are variables that
are storing strings. `Spam`, `Bill`, `a + b is`, `first_name is`, and
`Sorted Parts, After Midnight or` are the strings in this program. The
characters are surrounded by `"` or `'`. The other type of variables are
numbers. Remember that variables are used to store a value, they do not
use quotation marks (\" and \'). If you want to use an actual *value*,
you *must* use quotation marks.

``` {.python}
value1 == Pim
value2 == "Pim"
```

Both look the same, but in the first one Python checks if the value
stored in the variable `value1` is the same as the value stored in the
*variable* `Pim`. In the second one, Python checks if the string (the
actual letters `P`,`i`, and `m`) are the same as in `value2` (continue
this tutorial for more explanation about strings and about the `==`).

