### While loops

Presenting our first *control structure*. Ordinarily the computer starts
with the first line and then goes down from there. Control structures
change the order that statements are executed or decide if a certain
statement will be run. Here\'s the source for a program that uses the
while control structure:

``` {.python}
a = 0            # FIRST, set the initial value of the variable a to 0(zero).
while a < 10:    # While the value of the variable a is less than 10 do the following:
    a = a + 1    # Increase the value of the variable a by 1, as in: a = a + 1! 
    print(a)     # Print to screen what the present value of the variable a is.
                 # REPEAT! until the value of the variable a is equal to 9!? See note. 
                 
                 # NOTE:
                 # The value of the variable a will increase by 1
                 # with each repeat, or loop of the 'while statement BLOCK'.
                 # e.g. a = 1 then a = 2 then a = 3 etc. until a = 9 then...
                 # the code will finish adding 1 to a (now a = 10), printing the 
                 # result, and then exiting the 'while statement BLOCK'. 
                 #              --
                 # While a < 10: |
                 #     a = a + 1 |<--[ The while statement BLOCK ]
                 #     print (a) |
                 #              --
```

And here is the extremely exciting output:

`1`\
`2`\
`3`\
`4`\
`5`\
`6`\
`7`\
`8`\
`9`\
`10`

(And you thought it couldn\'t get any worse after turning your computer
into a five-dollar calculator?)

So what does the program do? First it sees the line `a = 0` and sets `a`
to zero. Then it sees `while a < 10:` and so the computer checks to see
if `a < 10`. The first time the computer sees this statement, `a` is
zero, so it is less than 10. In other words, as long as `a` is less than
ten, the computer will run the tabbed in statements. This eventually
makes `a` equal to ten (by adding one to `a` again and again) and the
`while a < 10` is not true any longer. Reaching that point, the program
will stop running the indented lines.

Always remember to put a colon \"**:**\" at the end of the `while`
statement line!

Here is another example of the use of `while`:

``` {.python}
a = 1
s = 0
print('Enter Numbers to add to the sum.')
print('Enter 0 to quit.')
while a != 0:                           
    print('Current Sum:', s)            
    a = float(input('Number? '))        
    s = s + a                            
print('Total Sum =', s)
```

`Enter Numbers to add to the sum.`\
`Enter 0 to quit.`\
`Current Sum: 0`\
`Number? `**`200`**\
`Current Sum: 200.0`\
`Number? `**`-15.25`**\
`Current Sum: 184.75`\
`Number? `**`-151.85`**\
`Current Sum: 32.9`\
`Number? `**`10.00`**\
`Current Sum: 42.9`\
`Number? `**`0`**\
`Total Sum = 42.9`

Notice how `print('Total Sum =', s)` is only run at the end. The `while`
statement only affects the lines that are indented with whitespace. The
`!=` means does not equal so `while a != 0:` means as long as `a` is not
zero run the tabbed statements that follow.

Note that `a` is a floating point number, and not all floating point
numbers can be accurately represented, so using `!=` on them can
sometimes not work. Try typing in 1.1 in interactive mode.

#### Infinite loops or Never Ending Loop

Now that we have while loops, it is possible to have programs that run
forever. An easy way to do this is to write a program like this:

``` {.python}
while 1 == 1:
   print("Help, I'm stuck in a loop.")
```

The \"`==`\" operator is used to test equality of the expressions on the
two sides of the operator, just as \"`<`\" was used for \"less than\"
before (you will get a complete list of all comparison operators in the
next chapter).

This program will output `Help, I'm stuck in a loop.` until the heat
death of the universe or you stop it, because 1 will forever be equal to
1. The way to stop it is to hit the Control (or *Ctrl*) button and *C*
(the letter) at the same time. This will kill the program. (Note:
sometimes you will have to hit enter after the Control-C.) On some
systems, nothing will stop it, short of killing the process\--so avoid!

